Northwood Hop Co.
Hop Care Guide

= What Do You Have? =
Northwood hops are harvested, conditioned overnight,
vacuum sealed, and frozen to 0C.

Unlike most hops for home brewing, these hops are sold WET
with 80% moisture content.
A typical homebrewing hop is sold DRY with 10% moisture content.

I pack wet hops because I prefer the flavor.
A wet hop smells like the hopyards in September: floral, citrusy, and piney.
A dry hop loses some of that aroma in the drying process.

== Bittering/Alpha Hops ==
My bittering hops are a blend of 4 classic northwest bittering varieties:
25% chinook
25% centennial
25% magnum
25% nugget

This results in a hop blend with 14.5% AA

== Aroma Hops ==
My aroma hops are a blend of:
50% cascade: a classic northwest hop with piney and citrusy aroma
50% Magnum: A modern hop from WSU (GO COUGS!) with floral and fruity aromas.

This results in a hop blend with 7.5% AA

= Method 1: Wet Hopping =
This is my preferred method of use.
Choose this approach if you plan to use your hops within 3 months.

Store frozen in the vacuum packing for longest life.

Thaw one day before use in the refrigerator.

When you brew, add 4.5x the weight of the dry hops called for in the recipe.
E.g. If the recipe calls for 1.5 oz of dry hop,
add 4.5 x 1.5oz = 6.75oz of wet hops.

This calculation accounts for the additional water weight in the WET hops.

= Method 2: Drying =
Use this method if you will be using these hops in 3+ months.

Thaw the hops in the refrigerator.
Spread the thawed hops one layer deep on a screen.
Sit for 2-4 weeks.
When hops are dry, seal and freeze.

Use like normal dry hops.

For faster drying:
* Spread the hops thinly
* Turn the hops daily
* Blow air over the hops
* Dry the hops in a warm room

= Hop Thoughts =
Q: Why do I prefer brewing with wet hops?
A: I love the smell of my hopyard in the fall.
   In fact, my favorite smell is a handful of hops fresh off the bine;
   the aroma remonds you of the freshest, most flavorful IPA you've ever stuck your
   nose in. Mmmmmmm.

   Wet hops capture this aroma much better than dry hops.
   During the drying process some oils carrying the hop aroma are lost.
   When you brew with wet hops you capture these oils and aromas in your beer;
   they aren't lost to the air in the room where the hops are dried.

   If you want to see this for yourself, try drying half of your hops and freezing the
   other half. When your hops are dry thaw out your frozen bag and do a sniff test.
   There will be a distinct difference in the intensity and palatte of the aroma.

Q: What's a good recipe to use?
A: Here's a 5 gallon IPA I brewed this fall. It's still fermenting at the moment.

  7 lbs LME Pale Ale malt
  1 lb c-10 crystal malt
  11 oz US-05 yeast
  1.5 oz DRY bittering hop blend (or 6.75 oz WET)
  3 oz DRY aroma hop blend (13.75 oz WET)
  1.5 oz DRY aroma hop in fermenter (or 6.75 oz WET)

  Water + c-10 in a straining bag for 30 mins at 150F
  Remove c-10 straining bag
  Boil LME Pale 60 mins
  Bittering hops: 60mins
  Aroma hops at: 30mins, 10mins, 5mins.
  Add a bag with 1.5 oz of Aroma hops to the fermenter
  Pitch US-05 at 80F

Q: Why do you blend your hops? I prefer to use variety X by itself?
   This makes it hard to follow my favorite recipes!?
A: I prefer the fuller flavor palatte of a hop blend.
   XXXJAT: Why?

Q: Why do you condition your hops? Shouldn't you freeze them immediately to
   capture the most aroma?
A: I've tried both ways, but I prefer the conditioning for 2 reasons:
   1) Freshly picked hops will often have surface moisture on the cones from dew,
      fog, or humidity (remember that they are picked in the PNW in the fall).
      Conditioning dries off this moisture, increasing shelf life.
   2) Freshly picked hops have a slight "Vegetal" scent: they have a slight aroma of
      wet grass. This scent is undesireable to my nose. Conditioning overnight
      allows this scent to dissapate.

Q: Can I get some hop Rhizomes?
A; Hell yeah! Just ask me.
   But remember: hop plants are aggressize growers and an invasive species.
   If they escape from your growing receptacle they will destroy local plant life.
   I have: Cascade, Chinook, Centennial, CAscade, Columbus, Fuggle, Nugget,
   Magnum, and Willamette rhizomes available.

Q: Can I get more hops?
A: Just ask me. I usually have some spare hops in my freezer.

Q: Help! My hops are covered in Bugs!
A: Aphids and mites love hop plants. They suck out the oils from your plants like
   thirsty little assholes. I can't really blame them though: hop oils are delicious.
   Spray down your plant with a horticultural oil weekly in July, August, and September
   to increase the quality of your harvest.

Q: Anyone you want to thank?
A: Oh yeah.

   Shout out to my man Larry for providing the land, equipment, and farming expertise.
   Shout out to my lady Erin for the labor and the support.
   Shout out to my bro Derek for the labor and the ideas.
   Shout out to my man Dillon for hooking me up with BBB!
   Shout out to my man Brett for the expertize, the rhizomes, and the equipment.
   Shout out to John Ryan and Jon Brouwer for beta testing.
   Shout out to Cloudburst for giving me a chance.
   Shout out to Boundary Bay for testing my hops in a commercial brew!
   Shout out to my wife for putting up with this shit.
   Shout out to beer for being delicious.
   Shout out to me for the hours and hours and hours of labor and research.
